Add doc on OS onboarding (#112026)
dotnet/runtime: docs/project/os-onboarding.md

- [Support for Windows Operating Systems](https://dev.azure.com/dnceng/internal/_wiki/wikis/DNCEng%20Services%20Wiki/939/Support-for-Windows-Operating-Systems) (MS internal)

## Context

In most cases, we find that new OS versions _may_  uncover problems in dotnet/runtime, but don't affect up-stack components or apps once resolved. A key design point of our runtime is to be a quite complete cross-platform and -architecture abstraction, so resolving OS compatibility breaks for higher-level code is an enduring intent.

Nearly all the APIs that touch native code (networking, cryptography) and deal with standard formats (time zones, ASN.1) are in dotnet/runtime. In many cases, we only see test breaks when we onboard a new OS, often from code that tests edge cases.

## Approach

Our rule is that we declare support (for all [supported .NET releases](https://github.com/dotnet/core/blob/main/releases.md)) for a new OS version after it is validated in dotnet/runtime `main`. We will only hold support on additional testing in special cases (which are uncommon).

> Our testing philosophy is based on percieved risk and past experience. The effective test matrix is huge, the product of OSes \* supported versions \* architectures.  We try to make smart choices to skip testing most of the matrix while retaining much of the practical coverage. We also know where we tend to get bitten most when we don't pay sufficient attention. For example, our bug risk across Linux, macOS, and Windows is not uniform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our testing philosophy is based on perceived risk and past experience. The effective test matrix is huge, the product of OSes \* supported versions \* architectures.  We try to make smart choices to skip testing most of the matrix while retaining much of the practical coverage. We also know where we tend to get bitten most when we don't pay sufficient attention. For example, our bug risk across Linux, macOS, and Windows is not uniform.

```

We  use pragmatism and efficiency to drive our decision making. All things being equal, we'll choose the lowest cost approach.

## Testing

Testing is the bread and butter of OS onboarding, particularly for a mature runtime like ours. New OS support always needs some form of test enablement.

Linux, Wasm, and some Windows testing is done in container images. This approach enables us to test many and regularly changing OS versions in a fixed/limited VM environment. The container image creation/update process is self-service (discussed later).

We use VMs (Linux and Windows) and raw metal hardware (Apple) in cases where containers are not practical or for more direct testing. This is the primary model for Apple and Windows OSes. The VMs and Apple hardware are relatively slow to change and require support from dnceng (discussed later).

### Adding coverage

New OS coverage should be added/tested first in `main`. If changes are required, we should prove them out first in `main` before committing to shipping them in a servicing release, if necessary.

> There are multiple reasons to add a new OS reference to a release branch:

Author: ```suggestion
There are multiple reasons to add a new OS reference in a release branch:

```

- Past experience suggests that coverage is required to protect against risk.
- OS version is or [will soon go EOL](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/111818#issuecomment-2613642202) and should be replaced by a newer version.

For example, we frequently need to backport Alpine updates to release branches to avoid EOL references but less commonly for Ubuntu, given the vast difference in support length.

A good strategy is to keep `main` at the bleeding edge of new OS versions. That way those references have a decent chance of never needing remediation once they end up in release branches. Being _active_ in `main` enables being _lazy_ in `release/`.

### Updating or removing coverage

We will often replace an older OS version with a new one, when it comes available. This approach is an effective strategy of maintaining the same level of coverage and of remediating EOL OSes ahead of time. For the most part, we don't need to care about a specific version. We just want coverage for the OS, like Alpine.

We should remediate any EOL OS references in our codebase. They don't serve any benefit and come with some risk.

> In the case that a .NET version will be EOL in <6 (and certainly <3) months, new coverage can typically be skipped. We may even be able to skip remediating EOL OS references. We often opt to stop updating [Supported OSes](https://github.com/dotnet/core/blob/main/os-lifecycle-policy.md) late in support period for related reasons. A lazy approach is often the best approach late in the game. Don't upset what's working.

Author: ```suggestion
In the case that a .NET version will be EOL in <6 (and certainly <3) months, new coverage can typically be skipped. We may even be able to skip remediating EOL OS references. We often opt to stop updating [supported OSes](https://github.com/dotnet/core/blob/main/os-lifecycle-policy.md) late in support period for related reasons. A lazy approach is often the best approach late in the game. Don't upset what's working.

```

## Building

Our [build methodology](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/project/linux-build-methodology.md) is oriented around cross-compiling, enabling us to target an old OS version and run on newer ones. It is uncommon for us to need to make changes to the build to address new OS versions, however, there are [rare cases where we need to make adjustments](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/101944).

We use both containers and VMs for building, depending on the OS. If we test in a container, we likely build in a container. Same for VMs.

Our primary concern is ensuring that we are using [supported operating systems and tools for our build](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/tree/main/docs/workflow/requirements).

Our Linux build containers are based on Azure Linux. We [typically need to update them](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/112191) with a new version of Azure Linux once per release. We do not update the toolset, however. That's fixed, per release.

> For Apple, we likely need to make an adjustment at each macOS or iOS release to account for an XCode version no longer being supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Apple, we likely need to make an adjustment at each macOS or iOS release to account for an Xcode version no longer being supported.

```

Reviewer: I see we have this casing mistake in several other places under docs. It would be nice to fix it while you are on it.

Container images are referenced in our pipeline files:

- [eng/pipelines/coreclr/templates/helix-queues-setup.yml](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/eng/pipelines/coreclr/templates/helix-queues-setup.yml)
- [eng/pipelines/libraries/helix.yml](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/eng/pipelines/libraries/helix.yml)
- [eng/pipelines/common/templates/pipeline-with-resources.yml](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/eng/pipelines/common/templates/pipeline-with-resources.yml)

Notes:

- The first two links are for testing and the last for building.
- The links are for the `main` branch. Release branches should have the same layout.

Example PRs:

- [dotnet/runtime #111768](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/111768)
- [dotnet/runtime #111504](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/111504)
- [dotnet/runtime #110492](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/110492)
- [dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker #1282](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker/pull/1282)
- [dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker #1314](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker/pull/1314)

### VMs

> VMs and raw metal environments are used for Linux, macOS, and Windows. They need to be [requested from dnceng](https://github.com/dotnet/dnceng/issues/4307). The turnaround can be long so put in your request before you need it.

Reviewer: Android is on the raw metal plan as well: https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/497236a2359f9de4b70b1dbd00e55449823e6f63/eng/pipelines/libraries/helix-queues-setup.yml#L94-L97

# Onboarding Guide for New Operating System Versions

Adding support for new operating systems versions is a frequent need. This guide describes how we do that, including the policies we use.

> Being _active_ in `main` enables being _lazy_ in `release/`.

This witticism is the underlying philosophy of our approach. By actively maintaining OS versions in our active coding branch, we get the double benefit of bleeding-edge coverage and (in many cases) can avoid EOL remediation cost in `release/` branches. Spending time on avoidable work is a failure of planning.

> Users are best served when we act _quickly_ not _exhaustively_.

> This double meaning is instructing us to be boldly pragmatic. Each new OS release brings a certain risk of breakage. The risk is far from uniform across the various repos and components that we maintain. Users are best served when we've developed 80% confidence and to leave the remaining (potential) 20% to bug reports. Exhaustive testing serves no one. We've also found that are users do a great job finding corner cases and enthusiastically participate in the process by opening issues in the appropriate repo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This double meaning is instructing us to be boldly pragmatic. Each new OS release brings a certain risk of breakage. The risk is far from uniform across the various repos and components that we maintain. Users are best served when we've developed 80% confidence and to leave the remaining (potential) 20% to bug reports. Exhaustive testing serves no one. We've also found that our users do a great job finding corner cases and enthusiastically participate in the process by opening issues in the appropriate repo.

```

In some cases, we're required to test an OS version until the end of its life and will need to take specific action to remediate the reference.

For whatever the reason, we should update references to EOL OSes if we have them.

## Mechanics

Most of our testing is done in container images. New images need to be created for each new version in the [dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker) repo. The repo is self-service and largely self-explanatory. One typically creates a new image using the pattern demonstrated by the previous version.

These images are referenced in our pipeline files:

- https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/eng/pipelines/coreclr/templates/helix-queues-setup.yml
- https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/eng/pipelines/libraries/helix.yml

Those files are for the `main` branch. The same files should be located in the same location in release branches.

Example PRs:

- https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/111768
- https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/111504

> - https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/110492

Reviewer 2: Can we add corresponding PRs from dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker?

Author: We could but they are less relevant/informative. I think that repo is much more self-explanatory.

Reviewer 2: When I got the PR, it helped me understand more about the convention without needing to read the site so much. It was helpful.

Author: Which PR? The one I gave you earlier?

Reviewer 2: excellent written and verbal communication skills,

Author: Can you share?

Reviewer 2: Here's the one from today: https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker/pull/1335

Author: That PR isn't a generally repeatable pattern, so it's perhaps the worst example to add to the doc. Each distro is a bit different. It's best just to look at the last Dockerfile for the image you are interested in. The are not hard to find.

> - https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/111768
> - https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/111504
> - https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/110492

Author: I added some PRs you @artl93.

```suggestion
- <https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/111768>
- <https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/111504>
- <https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/110492>
- <https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker/pull/1282>
- <https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker/pull/1314>
```

> # OS Onboarding Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Onboarding Guide for new OS versions

```

> Adding support for new operating systems (largely just new versions) is a frequent need. This guide describes how we do that, including policies we use.

Reviewer 3: Does this apply for new OS families, distros, architectures too, or just new versions of existing distros of the same architecture?  Seems to me like you are trying to write a general document but it's only covering a narrow scenario.

Author: Most of what we do is add support for new versions. When we added new architectures, we followed the same pattern. For example, when we added support for Azure Linux, it was the same pattern. While that example is a bit cheating (since it was Mariner re-branded), we still have to do all the things we'd do if it was completely new to us.

Reviewer 3: Adding new RIDs is no longer a thing, but pretty sure we have more to do here around new versions of apple, new distros, architecture, mobile / wasm, etc.  I'm fine with this doc not covering that - just call out what is out of scope.

Author: This doc is intented to cover the typical cases. I think you'll find that there is very little we have to do beyond testing. Perhaps I'm mistaken.

Reviewer: I think that the doc title should make it clear that this doc really only covers new OS versions.

https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/112026/files#r1938542342

If somebody from the community wanted to onboard actual new OS, this doc would not be applicable.

References:

- [.NET OS Support Tracking](https://github.com/dotnet/core/issues/9638)
- [Prereq container image lifecycle](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker/blob/main/lifecycle.md)

## Context

> In most cases, we find that new OSes _may_  uncover problems in dotnet/runtime and once resolved don't affect up-stack components or apps. This is because nearly all the APIs that touch native code (networking, cryptography) and deal with standard formats (time zones, ASN.1) are in dotnet/runtime. In many cases, we only see test breaks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most cases, we find that new OS versions _may_  uncover problems in dotnet/runtime and once resolved don't affect up-stack components or apps. This is because nearly all the APIs that touch native code (networking, cryptography) and deal with standard formats (time zones, ASN.1) are in dotnet/runtime. In many cases, we only see test breaks.

```

## Approach

New OSes should be added/tested first in `main`. If changes are required, we should prove them out first in `main` before committing to shipping them in a servicing release. However, it isn't always necessary to backport test coverage.

There are two reasons (beyond known product breaks) to add a new OS reference to a release branch:

- Add coverage due to practice or known risk
- Update a reference to an EOL OS version

If those reasons don't apply, then we can often skip backporting new coverage.

In the case that a .NET version will be EOL in <6 months, then new coverage can typically be skipped.

## End-of-life

We will often  maintain our level of coverage when a new OS comes available by replacing an older one. This ends up being an effective strategy to remediating EOL OSes, ahead of time.
In some cases, we're required to test an OS version until the end of its life and will need to take specific action to remediate the reference.

For whatever the reason, we should update references to EOL OSes if we have them.

> ## Mechanics

Reviewer 3: What about builds and changing the platform we build on?

Author: Builds are not affected by OS onboarding and use a different process. We only build on x64.

We've documented the process we use for Linux: https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/project/linux-build-methodology.md. Windows is simpler.

Reviewer 3: My point is that we should also cover how new platforms apply to build and what we need to do to update the versions of build agents.

Author: It depends what you mean. In practice, we don't do this. The last one of these that I am aware of is Apple Arm64. That was a massive project (as you recall) and no doc could cover that.

Do you have another example?

Author: Perhaps @sbomer @jkoritzinsky can think of some examples.

> Most of our testing is done in container images. New images need to be created for each new version in the [dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker) repo. The repo is self-service and largely self-explanatory. One typically creates a new image using the pattern demonstrated by the previous version.

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't say most - I think it's a mix between Helix queues and docker images.

Author: ```suggestion
Much of our testing is done in container images. New images need to be created for each new version in the [dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker) repo. The repo is self-service and largely self-explanatory. One typically creates a new image using the pattern demonstrated by the previous version.

```

Reviewer 3: What about helix queues?  The most recent ask for Server 2025 was delayed for so long because we didn't have queues.  I think we need to call that out as a prerequisite - unless there was a miss here and testing could have been unblocked with containers all along.

> Most of our testing is done in container images. New images need to be created for each new version in the [dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker) repo. The repo is self-service and largely self-explanatory. One typically creates a new image using the pattern demonstrated by the previous version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Linux testing is done in container images. New images need to be created for each new version in the [dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-buildtools-prereqs-docker) repo. The repo is self-service and largely self-explanatory. One typically creates a new image using the pattern demonstrated by the previous version.

```

Reviewer: I know that Windows testing uses containers in some cases too. Windows requires the host OS version to match the container OS version, so updates require much more coordination, unlike Linux.

> 

Reviewer: New versions of Apple OSes, Android and Browser have its own mechanics. Should they be covered as well?

Author: Yes.

Reviewer: The Browser ("OS" for wasm) version updates look like this https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/112066 and they seem to be done by some kind of automation. Worth mentioning browser as yet another unique test environment category?

Author: Didn't have that context so thanks.
